---
sidebar_position: 6
---

import SchemaViewer from "@site/src/components/SchemaViewer";

# Expression syntax

Pointer expressions operate on the domain of bytes representing unsigned
integers.

<SchemaViewer
  schema={{ id: "schema:ethdebug/format/pointer/expression" }}
  />

## Literal values

An expression can be a literal value.

Literal values **must** be represented either as JSON numbers or as
`0x`-prefixed hexadecimal strings. Hexadecimal strings always represent a
literal string of bytes.

For convenience, this schema does not restrict hexadecimal string
representations to those that specify an even-number of digits (i.e., those
that specify complete byte pairs); odd numbers of hexadecimal digits are fine.

Hexadecimal string representations **may** omit leading zeroes; values are
assumed to be left-padded to the bytes width appropriate for the context.

<SchemaViewer
  schema={{ id: "schema:ethdebug/format/pointer/expression" }}
  pointer="#/$defs/Literal"
  />

## Variables

An expression can be a string value equal to the identifier for a known
scalar variable introduced by some pointer representation.

For an example where scalar variables may appear, see the
[List collection schema](/spec/pointer/collection/list).

<SchemaViewer
  schema={{ id: "schema:ethdebug/format/pointer/expression" }}
  pointer="#/$defs/Variable"
  />

## Arithmetic operations

An expression can be an object of the form `{ <op>: [...] }`, where `<op>`
denotes an arithmetic operation.

<SchemaViewer
  schema={{ id: "schema:ethdebug/format/pointer/expression" }}
  pointer="#/$defs/Arithmetic"
  />

## Lookup region definition

An expression can reference properties defined for a particular region, such as
another region's `"offset"` or `"length"`. Such expressions resolve to the
same value as the expression specified for that corresponding property.

<SchemaViewer
  schema={{ id: "schema:ethdebug/format/pointer/expression" }}
  pointer="#/$defs/Lookup"
  />

## Reading from the EVM

An expression can be an object of the form `{ "$read": "<region>" }`, where
`<region>` references a particular region defined in some root pointer.

The value of such an expression is the concatenation of bytes present in the
running machine state that correspond to the bytes addressed by the referenced
region.

<SchemaViewer
  schema={{ id: "schema:ethdebug/format/pointer/expression" }}
  pointer="#/$defs/Read"
  />

## Keccak256 hashes

An expression can be an object of form `{ "$keccak256": [...] }`, indicating
that the value of the expression is a Solidity-style, tightly-packed keccak256
hash of the concatenation of bytes specified by the list.

<SchemaViewer
  schema={{ id: "schema:ethdebug/format/pointer/expression" }}
  pointer="#/$defs/Keccak256"
  />

## Resize operations

In certain situations, e.g. keccak256 hashes, it's crucially important to be
able to express the bytes width of particular expression values. This schema
provides primitives to allow specifying an explicit bytes width for a
particular sub-expression.

<SchemaViewer
  schema={{ id: "schema:ethdebug/format/pointer/expression" }}
  pointer="#/$defs/Resize"
  />

## Region references

Regions can be referenced either by name (which **must** be a defined region),
or by use of the literal string value `"$this"` (which indicates that the
referenced region is the region containing the expression itself).

In cases where an expression is used outside the context of a particular
region definition, the use of `"$this"` is **prohibited**.

Individual properties **may not** be defined with any reference to themselves.
Properties also **may not** be defined in terms of mutual reference to each
other. <small>(Don't make this harder than it has to be.)</small>

<SchemaViewer
  schema={{ id: "schema:ethdebug/format/pointer/expression" }}
  pointer="#/$defs/Reference"
  />
