---
sidebar_position: 3
---

import CodeListing from "@site/src/components/CodeListing";

# Making regions concrete

There are two main aspects involved when converting from a `Pointer.Region`,
which is full of properties whose values are the dynamic `Pointer.Expression`
objects, into a `Cursor.Region`, whose expression properties have been replaced
with actual bytes `Data`:

## Fixing stack-located regions' `slot` offset

Since stack pointers are expected to be declared at one time yet evaluated
later, the relative offset that stack pointers use must be adjusted based on
the initial stack length vs. the current stack length.

This behavior is encapsulated by the `adjustStackLength` function:

<CodeListing
  packageName="@ethdebug/pointers"
  sourcePath="src/dereference/region.ts"
  extract={sourceFile => sourceFile.getFunction("adjustStackLength")}
  />

## Evaluating region property expressions

The more substantial aspect of making a region concrete, however, is the
process by which this implementation evaluates each of the `Pointer.Region`'s
expression properties and converts them into their `Data` values.

This process would be very straightforward, except that pointer expressions
may reference the region in which they are specified by use of the special
region identifier `"$this"`.

Fortunately, the schema does not allow any kind of circular reference, so a
more robust implementation could pre-process a region's properties to detect
cycles and determine the evaluation order for each property based on which
property references which other property. That is, a robust implementation
might take this pointer:

```json
{
  "location": "memory",
  "offset": {
    "$sum": [
      0x60,
      { ".length": "$this" }
    ]
  },
  "length": "$wordsize"
}
```

... and detect that it must evaluate `length` before evaluating `offset`.

The **@ethdebug/pointers** reference implementation **does not do any such
smart thing**. Instead, it pushes each of the three possible expression
properties (`"slot"`, `"offset"`, and `"length"`) into a queue, and then
proceeds to evaluate properties from the queue one at a time.

When evaluating a particular property, if `evaluate()` fails, it adds this
property to the end of the queue to try again later, counting the number of
times this attempt has been made for this property. Because the number of
properties is at most 3, if the number of attempts ever reaches 3, the
implementation can infer that there must be a circular reference.

<CodeListing
  packageName="@ethdebug/pointers"
  sourcePath="src/dereference/region.ts"
  extract={sourceFile => sourceFile.getFunction("evaluateRegion")}
  />
